Necessity of Arctic Cooperation
1. The Arctic region’s changed status and the new opportunities, challenges and threats arising from it are based, above all, on the thawing of the ice cover as a result of climate change. Whenever this development has been estimated, the changes have proved to have taken place more rapidly than had been forecast. A one-degree change in the average global temperature corresponds to a two-to-three-degree change in the Arctic. Therefore new regions’ natural resources become available for exploitation, and new routes and opportunities for transportation are found whose economic potential attracts people’s attention towards the north.

Even though for many, the change means nothing but new profitable investment opportunities and jobs, it is even more important to understand that the vulnerable Arctic ecology and the global repercussions affecting it require exceptional caution. It is essential to take care that the economic potential of the Arctic region is exploited without causing indispensable damage and loss.

The growing significance of Arctic natural resources has a direct impact on events in the global economy and politics. Because of climate change, globalisation and technological development, the Arctic region is no more seen as a peripheral area but it is gaining a place at the centre of international attention. The academic interest directed at it to date is rapidly transforming into concrete political and economic interest and action. Arctic change is inevitable, still mainly unpredictable, but of huge dimensions. More information is needed but it is not enough. What is necessary, too, is immediate steps. The question goes as follows: do the decision-makers meet the prerequisites needed to be able to make the right decisions?

To be able to understand the Arctic region and the fundamental transformation there, we need to view it from as broad perspective as possible, taking into account not only the natural resources and transport routes but also the environment and the people. Our actions – at both national and international levels – are based on formulating a comprehensive outlook of the situation and its causes and effects.

2. The Arctic region within the Arctic Circle is in many respects still uncharted. We perceive the thawing ice, but do not exactly know the reason for it. We see that the impacts of trans-boundary air pollution are considerably stronger in the Arctic region than elsewhere on the globe, but is there room for mitigation anymore? Thawing ice opens up new shipping routes, but how safe are they and the conditions linked with them? The northern soil contains rich mineral deposits, but how to use them in a sustainable manner and taking care of the environment? If the melting Arctic ice means a risk of rising sea levels, what about thawing permafrost and methane gas emissions?

The Arctic change is followed the most closely by the local inhabitants. The indigenous peoples’ traditional knowledge dating back thousands of years has helped them survive in challenging and demanding circumstances. However, for the Arctic inhabitants the ongoing change is imposed from outside. To understand the change and to find the right and essential information, traditional knowledge must be interlinked with the most recent international state-of-the-art research. The rapid expansion of research and cooperation with researchers helps to prevent the development of defective and wrong ideas and to establish jointly agreed and clear rules for Arctic activities.

3. While not long ago, the Arctic Ocean’s literal meaning on the map was a white polar zone, swept over by trans-continental airplanes and criss-crossed by submarines, today a full picture of the Arctic is shaping up with an unprecedented speed. The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) provides an efficient framework for the development, complemented and specified by bilateral and regional solutions. Norway and Russia have reached an agreement on the border in the Arctic Sea, but many delimitations of the continental shelf and border issues are still pending. It is vital that these questions be resolved in accordance with international law, based on objective scientific reports.

In Arctic discussion, the key elements are cooperation, interdependence, trust and openness. Our thinking and actions rely on international cooperation based on international agreements. The sufficiency of the current treaty base should be reviewed. Finland is ready to contribute when complementary regulations are prepared. States’ sovereignty must be respected but it must not prevent acknowledgement of mutual interdependencies; there is always room for increased trust; and openness is one of the most effective means in building trust.

4. Finland is an Arctic state. The change of the region has far-reaching repercussions throughout society. Our own Arctic policy is built on a clear foundation: when economic activities become more active, Finland – and the other Arctic states – must take care that the environment and the indigenous peoples of the region are respected in all activities. From the point of view of sustainable development, it is essential that the Arctic natural resources are exploited in a controlled manner, taking into account the economic, social, cultural and environmental impacts.

In addition to the challenges, the Arctic change also opens up considerable opportunities for Finland. We have extensive Arctic top-level expertise and know-how. From as early as the 19th century, we have had to come up with innovative solutions to ensure year-round shipping, involving seafaring competence, and weather and ice condition forecasts, environmental technology, and energy production. Our know-how has been supported by multi-disciplinary and long-term Arctic training and research. Because of the Arctic change, there will be a considerable increase in the demand for this know-how.

Top-level competence and cutting-edge technology do not as such guarantee the best results from the point of view of the whole, but they must also be applied in a responsible manner, with due regard for the constraints set by the Arctic environment. International law, national legislation, and official regulations still play an important role. Care must be taken that they are up to date and observed.

The mining industry has enormous potential for growth in the Finnish Lapland, in particular. At the same time, its development involves considerable risks relating to the promotion of environmental protection and tourism. I am of the opinion that our valid mining legislation should be further revised taking notice of the various factors linked with this matter.

The goals of Finland’s Arctic policy are outlined in the Government Programme. The Government has taken the growing importance of Arctic matters into account by recording them for the first time as an entity of its own in the Programme. The Government will discuss the Arctic policy guidelines and priorities in the autumn of 2012. The relevant Arctic actors will be specified and the impact of the planned measures will be evaluated then. A successful Arctic policy supports the Government Programme’s objective to enhance employment and competitiveness.

In addition to the Government Programme, guidelines of our Arctic policy are set out in Finland’s Strategy for the Arctic Region, adopted in 2010. The Strategy, which focuses on the external relations, defines the goals of Finland’s Arctic Policy and the means for their promotion. The main observations of the Strategy, which was prepared by Senior Officials representing different ministries, dealt with the use of Finland’s Arctic know-how, protection of the Arctic environment, research, strengthening of the Arctic Council, and the development of the EU’s Arctic policy. 

The Government has decided to review and update the Strategy because of the rapid development of the Arctic region, on the one hand, and because many of the recommendations for action set out in the Strategy have already been implemented, on the other. The work will be completed by the spring of 2013, for example by means of hearing various Arctic reference groups more widely than before, including representatives of business life, research and financing institutions, Northern actors, and Saami people.

5. Finland aims to adopt a national overall approach to Arctic issues and to follow and revise the approach as required. This work cannot be done in isolation from the international dimensions of Arctic discussion. Bilateral relations are important in Arctic issues, too – a good example is the Finnish-Russian Arctic Partnership Seminar in Oulu today. In certain questions related to the partnership countries, results are reached faster bilaterally.

We are engaged in Arctic cooperation not only with Russia but also with Sweden and Norway. The Nordic countries play their own Arctic role and also participate in the Nordic Ministerial Council’s Arctic Programme. Although in Arctic contexts, the Nordic countries have very different points of departure, we hold highly similar views of the fundamental principles concerning the Arctic and can put them forward more emphatically in other forums.

The Barents Euro-Arctic Council and the Northern Dimension partnerships operate in their own fields of activity in concrete ways and with results. They offer the best practices and well tested solutions for Arctic contexts.

The UN’s role in the Arctic discussion is mainly linked with UNCLOS. Further, certain specialised agencies, such as IMO, UNDP and UNEP, play their own Arctic roles, reflecting the larger dimensions of Arctic questions in their fields of activity. From time to time, suggestions are made to put Arctic issues in general on the UN agenda; the grounds for this have been their assumed growth of importance internationally. On the other hand, we can ask whether it is possible to reach results more effectively by bringing Arctic issues under global scrutiny in the UN Assembly.

6. I think that the Arctic Council, which comprises the eight Arctic states and representatives of the indigenous peoples, is the most efficient international forum to promote Arctic discussion. Established in 1996, the Arctic Council has been a success story – not because it would have somehow been a groundbreaking concept, but because it has been possible for it to rely on excellent Arctic cooperation. This spirit of cooperation between the Arctic actors has granted continuing peaceful development in the region despite the unstable state of change.

The idea to set up an Arctic Council was born 21 years ago in a meeting in Rovaniemi, where the theme of discussion was concern for the Arctic environment and its protection. In the framework of the so-called Rovaniemi Process, initiated in the same connection, attention was paid to the environmental impact assessment (EIA) in the Arctic region. Today all Arctic states carry out statutory environmental impact assessments. They also implement the Espoo Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary Context. The Member States of the EU and the European Economic Area are also legally bound by the EU’s EIA Directive.

For the Arctic economic development to proceed in an environmentally and socially sustainable manner, EIAs have to be conducted effectively, taking into account the special characteristics of the Arctic region. Since the framework and guidelines concerning the EIA have been created on Finland’s initiative, it would now be appropriate – in my opinion – to review how the assessment functions in practice. The public authorities responsible for the EIAs should deepen their mutual contacts and, at the same time, the Arctic Council should actively bring the matter on the agenda.

The environment and sustainable development continue to be the key fields of activity in the Council, but its agenda has recently expanded to include shipping, Arctic research and also more normative matters: the first binding agreement between the Member States of the Council – the Search and Rescue Agreement – will enter into force shortly and negotiations on an oil spill preparedness agreement are under way (the next round of negotiations will actually be in Helsinki in two weeks’ time). The Arctic Council’s studies – concerning, for example, shipping and the human dimension – represent cutting edge international research. Only a couple of weeks ago, a decision was made to prepare an ambitious comprehensive review on the change in the Arctic.

We have actively supported the Arctic Council’s strengthening, and it is good to mention, that important steps in this direction – including the establishment of a permanent Secretariat and agreement about a joint budget – have just been taken. Arctic cooperation and the Arctic Council have also been described as the most closely guarded secret; investments in communications will change this, too.

The first round of Arctic Council chairs will be completed next spring. It will be a good moment to take stock of the Council’s position from a wider perspective and to draft guidelines for the coming years. The Council’s internal coherence and maintenance of the unique status of the indigenous peoples are naturally important matters.

Restricting the review to deal with such mega-trends as the impacts of climate change on the Arctic region only is not sufficient. Global warming and thawing of the Arctic ice are not regional phenomena but have wider, even global repercussions. Equally, the transportation routes opening in the Arctic Ocean or the markets for natural resources do not apply to the Arctic states only but are a part of larger international connections. It is therefore of vital importance to include this wider perspective in the preparation of the ministerial declaration of the Kiruna meeting,”Arctic region in a global context”. It is also essential that the Arctic Council quickly find the means to effective interaction and cooperation with the countries and institutions outside the Arctic region, whose position and efforts in the Arctic discussion cannot be ignored.

The Council is trying to move on from a preparer status to that of a decision-maker. I think that the Arctic Council meets all the preconditions required to proceed to a fully fledged international organisation, if it understands its position and responsibility in the global perspective. The rest of the world is increasingly interested in the Arctic region and in the Arctic Council, too. This is not a bad thing, vice versa. The Council is to adopt – in its own interest – not only an open and constructive approach to the observers, but also identify forms of cooperation with them that are sensible and appropriate from the point of view of the whole.

7. Russia is a natural Arctic partner for Finland. We know each other and we have long and effective scientific, economic and technological relations of cooperation, which can be used in Arctic contexts too. Finnish Arctic expertise has consistently used Russia as its most important marketing area. Our new Arctic partnership provides a setting for charting our mutual interests, establishing contacts, and reaching concrete outcomes between different players. The partnership’s content is still being explored. I am convinced that this meeting in Oulu means a turning point in this respect. Instead of speeches, we will concentrate on questions that interest us both and intend to attain concrete results.

The main theme of the Finnish-Russian Arctic Partnership Seminar in Oulu is most topical: the Northern Sea Route (NSR). There has been many-sided discussion on shipbuilding, ice technology, navigation, transport and logistics; security and also environmental aspects. Additionally, parliaments’ and regions’ views about our Arctic cooperation will be heard. For my own part I once more wish all our Russian partners warmly welcome to this seminar. I am particularly happy that not only our closest neighbours but also our slightly more distant friends from the North-East Passage route, Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug and Yakutia, are present.

There will clearly be no lack of themes of discussion in our partnership in the future.. Examples of topics of discussion are the environment in its wider sense, cooperation in research and between universities, the mining industry, tourism and indigenous peoples.

8. The European Union is an Arctic player for many strong reasons: three of its Member States are Arctic states; it plays a key role in the global discussion on the environment, especially climate change. Further, the EU has extensive Arctic research programmes together with their financing instruments and several Arctic sectors of operation fall under the Community competence within the EU. In the past years, the EU has addressed Arctic issues in the Council, Commission and Parliament. The Commission communication on its Arctic policy, which is being finalised, contains a topical account of the EU’s views and activities in the Arctic region.

Finland exerts active influence on the development and clarification of the EU’s Arctic policy. Therefore, to improve the EU’s external and internal Arctic communications, Finland has proposed that the EU open an Arctic information centre with the Arctic Centre of the University of Lapland in Rovaniemi as its hub. The future EU Arctic Information Centre is supported by a network of 17 European Arctic research and information institutes, with a broad representation of European Arctic expertise. The European Parliament has granted financing and the matter is prepared in the Commission as a part of a wider Arctic review. In the EU, too, Arctic issues are cross-cutting issues affecting several sectors of operation, which is why an appropriate body is needed to formulate a uniform concept and to communicate about it. Finland will follow closely how the matter is to proceed to practical solutions in the near future.

In the Arctic Council, the EU is among the applicants for a permanent observer status. Because the EU clearly fulfils the criteria set for observers and the mutual interests to promote the cooperation are evident, we expect that the Arctic Council will unanimously decide to grant an observer status to the EU next spring.

9. Geopolitical development in the Arctic can thus generally be looked at peacefully. We have progressed a long way from the East-West confrontation in the Cold War period; today, practical cooperation is conducted across the former faultlines.

I am confident that there will not be any new division or irreconcilable conflicts in the Arctic region. The Arctic Council’s activities have established an atmosphere of trust among the Member States and generated a new kind of interest in other countries. The Council has gained an established position and we can consider the future of the Arctic policy both internationally and nationally.

Finland can influence the development of the Arctic region internationally by producing solutions applicable to the Arctic. These solutions are formulated on the basis of our national Arctic policy. Our capacity to serve as an example in Arctic research, in addressing the views of the indigenous peoples or, for example, mining industry that observes the principles of sustainable development, provides us a foundation on which we can base an effective international role and activities.