Ladies and Gentlemen,

The Finnish Government recently adopted a new Arctic strategy, based on the following vision: “Finland is an active Arctic actor with the ability to reconcile the limitations imposed by the Arctic environment with the related business opportunities. It can do so in a sustainable manner, based on international cooperation.”

While realising this vision may seem highly challenging, the strategy lists a number of actions which can clearly be performed in practice. These include: 
- the systematic follow-up and implementation of the Environmental Impact Assessment mechanism originating in the Rovaniemi process
- the development of a network of protection areas in the Arctic
- the establishment of a centre of excellence for chemical and oil spill recovery.

The region’s growing significance and the increasing perception of Finland as a wholly Arctic country were guiding principles when drawing up the strategy. Sustainable development of the region is very much in the interests of Finland as a whole. In addition, I believe that we also have the plentiful skills and expertise required for the important task of addressing our Arctic challenges and opportunities in a sustainable manner.

The new strategy is ambitious and far-reaching. Among the strategies of the Arctic countries, it is the most comprehensive, including over one hundred concrete actions required to achieve the fifty goals established. It explores the possibilities of bolstering Finland’s position within the Arctic region in a range of spheres. Attention is given to issues such as: 
- the creation of new business opportunities
- the vulnerable Arctic environment 
- the effects on northern parts of Finland
- international cooperation

The new strategy rests on four pillars: Finland as an Arctic country, Finnish Arctic expertise, Sustainable development and environmental considerations, and International cooperation. Together, these elements define our role in the Arctic region.

We aim to promote growth and enhance competitiveness in the region, while paying due regard to the environment. Environmental objectives and efforts to advance economic activity can and must be simultaneously addressed.

In the context of international cooperation, Finland’s Arctic objectives are associated with our general policies on the promotion of stability, cooperation and sustainable development. They are also linked to the interests of Finnish businesses and research communities.

For the Finnish economy, the Arctic region – Russia and Norway in particular – represent a growing market in which Finland enjoys a natural competitive edge. This is an area where Finland’s geographical, cultural and competence-based advantages come to the fore. However, success will also require long-term cooperation and close networking between the public and private sectors, both at national and international level. To complement multilateral Arctic cooperation, we have built bilateral Arctic partnerships, first with Russia and then with Norway and Canada. A partnership is a flexible framework facilitating contacts between businesses, institutions and regions.

Finland has long traditions and leading expertise in winter navigation. Finnish ice-reinforced vessels have been operating for years in the Arctic, including the North-East Passage. Finland aims to become a leading expert in the Arctic maritime industry and shipping. Finnish companies are already actively involved in projects to develop Arctic sea areas. Finland also manufactures advanced, state-of-the-art Arctic ice-breakers. While Russia remains the most important export market for Finnish maritime technology, Canada, Norway, the United States and China are also key markets in this regard.

To reinforce Arctic navigation skills and expertise, coordinated international action is called for in the development of training, research and administrative cooperation. In some cases, best practices developed in the Baltic Sea region could be applied to the Arctic area.

Finland is in a position to offer new types of services to facilitate safe transportation and contribute to the preservation of the marine environment. Finland has first-rate expertise in mechanical oil recovery in icy conditions – a technology that is vital to Arctic sea areas.

The Arctic Council is the pre-eminent forum for addressing Arctic issues. Finland strongly supports the Council by recognising its global role and supporting efforts to engage Arctic stakeholders outside the region in the work of the Council. The Arctic Council’s institutional role has been growing since the establishment of a permanent secretariat, the conclusion of binding international agreements and the extension of the Council’s agenda. The addition of economic issues to the Council’s agenda is highly welcome, since this reflects the Council’s ability to respond to the new dynamism characterising activities in the Arctic region. Finland is actively considering further steps to strengthen the Council, with a view to our approaching Chairmanship in 2017. These include our proposal of organising a Summit between Arctic Council leaders, as well as our initiative to move the Council towards becoming a treaty-based organisation.

Finland is an international Arctic actor in a number of forums such as the Arctic Council, the Barents Euro-Arctic Council, the EU, the United Nations and many of its sub-organisations. Finland is also proactive in research and expert networks and in bilateral relations. Arctic issues play an important role in our foreign policy and image creation.

The European Union is crucial to Finland’s Arctic policy. Finland cooperates with Sweden and Denmark in developing and reinforcing the European Union’s Arctic policy. This purpose is served by the European Union’s observer status on the Arctic Council. To effectively strengthen EU policy and communicate widely on the EU’s role within the Arctic context, Finland has proposed the establishment of an EU Arctic Information Center here in Rovaniemi. The preparatory process is under way and we expect a decision on the Center next year.

Finland currently holds the presidency of the Barents Euro-Arctic Council (BEAC). Barents cooperation brings a regional perspective to Arctic policy and has helped establish permanent networks for cross-border cooperation. Barents cooperation and Northern Dimension partnerships have major potential to benefit the entire Arctic region. As well as the Nordic countries, both Russia and the EU are involved in such cooperation. Greater mutual consistency and links between Barents cooperation and Northern Dimension policies will create attractive opportunities, in areas such as the environmental and transport sectors.

In the context of the Nordic Council of Ministers, Arctic cooperation also contributes to the activities of northern regional councils, all of which are in line with Finland’s national interests.

Ladies and gentlemen,

Several important scientific sessions will be held during this conference. Their themes include the Arctic within the global economy and its role in shaping our responses to environmental problems. The mining industry, urbanisation in the Arctic and tourism will also be covered. Science has always been – and still is – a cornerstone of Arctic cooperation. As such, it provides guidance in all aspects of the Arctic Council’s work. It is easy to see that activities in the Arctic must be based on accurate information.

I am delighted to note that, next April in Helsinki, Finland will play host to the most important annual scientific event on the subject of the Arctic – the Arctic Science Summit Week. Indeed, it is important that we base our decisions about Arctic policies on up-to-date, accurate and relevant information. I believe that more interaction on Arctic issues is needed between governments, scientific institutions and business life. I am delighted to note that this has been fully understood and put into practice here in Rovaniemi.