
Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,

It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all to today’s event also on my own behalf. Both Nordic cooperation and Arctic matters lie at the core of our being, and bringing these two themes together feels like a family gathering raised to the power of two.

Today, I would like to share a few thoughts about the goals we have for Nordic cooperation in Arctic questions. To start with, I will explain how we see Finland’s Arctic identity and our goals in the region. I will then say a few words about our goals in Nordic cooperation. And finally, I will bring this all together.

Ladies and gentlemen,

Finland is an Arctic country. And I mean Finland, the whole of Finland – from top to toe. In our National Strategy for the Arctic Region, we emphasise our determination to retain Finland’s position as one of the global leaders in activities related to Arctic expertise.

Our strategy is based on four pillars. First, as I already mentioned, Finland is an Arctic country. Second, we have exceptional expertise in relation to the Arctic. Third, our guiding light in Arctic issues is sustainable development and concern for the environment, even when we talk about economic development and growth in the region. And fourth, we think international cooperation is absolutely vital when we are dealing with the Arctic region.

The Strategy was written in 2013 and we are now updating it to some extent. At this time, we will focus on concrete activities based on the existing strategy – and also on following up their implementation. We are also incorporating elements from the current Government Programme, particularly concerning the key Government projects on employment and competitiveness. The creation of new jobs and growth is essential also in the north.

Dear Nordic colleagues,

This year, Finland is chairing the work of the Nordic Council of Ministers. This has given us a great opportunity to reflect upon the goals of Nordic cooperation in today’s world. As we all know, the importance of Nordic cooperation is continuously growing. We live in a changing political, economic and security environment, and because of this, many of us are reflecting on the value of our common Nordic roots and identity. For us Finns, the Nordic countries are our closest partners and friends – not only in Nordic matters, but also in international ones. Close interaction between us is essential.

Our goals during this chairmanship year are twofold. On the one hand, we have wanted to build on the existing strengths of Nordic cooperation, such us our knowhow in water resources management. On the other hand, we have wanted to take Nordic cooperation forward by, for example, mainstreaming the theme of digitalisation in many of the Nordic discussions we have had throughout this year. And, we have strongly supported the modernisation process of the Nordic institutions to make sure that our means will also meet our needs in the years to come.

Ladies and gentlemen,

All Nordic countries are also Arctic countries. This is why it is natural, and absolutely necessary, that these two dimensions of our cooperation are closely interlinked. We all have a responsibility to make sure that this is achieved. We must not forget that on a global scale, we Nordics are often seen as one group that contributes positively to the global agenda.

It is true that in some fields, notably in business, we might also be competitors in the Arctic region. But overall, we share the same interests and concerns. 

This is evident by the fact that the Nordic Council of Ministers also has an Arctic cooperation programme. The overall goals of this programme are to support sustainable development in the region, and to create Nordic added value through projects and initiatives. I think it is important that this cooperation programme also supports the work done within the Arctic Council and in other relevant international and regional forums. Coordination is the key.

For us nationally, the focus on coordination and continuation is particularly important as next year we will take up the chairmanship of the Arctic Council. We are committed to building synergies between the two chairmanships.

Let me give you a concrete example. During our chairmanship of the Nordic Council of Ministers we have initiated a project that is directly related to the Arctic. It is called "Arctic Freshwater Capital in the Nordic Countries". This project is linked to the precious freshwater resources in the Arctic region – and it serves as one of the many bridges between our two chairmanships.

I would also like to mention two other projects as examples of important work done in the north. One is a project by the University of Oulu concerning solutions for Arctic mobile networks. Another one is a project on strengthening cooperation in developing tourism in the Arctic regions of Finland, Sweden and Norway.

The trio of Finland, Sweden and Norway was also behind a report called ‘Growth from the North’ that was published at the Arctic Frontiers conference in Tromsø in January 2015. The drivers of growth mentioned in the report are linked to the idea that each Nordic country has its own strengths and that these strengths should be developed through joint efforts to benefit all three countries. You will hear more about the conclusions of the report later this afternoon. I am sure they will be relevant also to our Danish and Icelandic friends.

It is essential that the Nordic countries also remain an effective player in the EU's Arctic policy. The European Union is an important partner for all Arctic countries, members and non-members alike. The EU can make a significant contribution in the Arctic both regionally and globally. In fact, the EU’s third Arctic communication released in April paves the way to a more ambitious Arctic policy of the Union. The enhancement of Arctic cooperation should be elevated to a key priority in the EU’s external relations.

Ladies and gentlemen,

Let me wish you a productive and thought-provoking afternoon – and let’s continue our common Nordic efforts for an environmentally sound, stable and prosperous Arctic.