A	Arctic
(A) Current situation in the Arctic and Japan's View
Environmental changes in the Arctic, caused by global warming (melting of sea ice, permafrost, ice sheet and glaciers, etc.), have brought about new opportunities to the international community, such as utilization of the Arctic Sea Routes and resource development. On the other hand, it has also posed various challenges, such as the acceleration of global warming, its negative impacts on the vulnerable environment of the Arctic, and potential changes in the international security environment, resulting in mounting attention by the international community.

In dealing with these opportunities and challenges over the Arctic, based on a wide range of international cooperation, we have to work out necessary measures through grasping actual condition of environmental changes in the Arctic and its impact on the global environment, as well as precisely predicting further changes. In addition, it is necessary for us to reach a common understanding on appropriate manners of economic use of the Arctic. As a prerequisite for that, actions based on the rule of law must be ensured, which can be seen in dealing with territorial disputes and maritime delimitation issues in the Arctic. In October 2015, Japan adopted its first comprehensive Arctic Policy. Based on this policy, Japan will contribute to the international community as a main player in addressing Arctic issues, especially by making full use of Japan's strength in science and technology.

(B) Active participation in international initiatives on the Arctic
In the area of international initiatives concerning the Arctic, Japan will (1) actively participate in addressing global issues on the Arctic and in international rule-making process over the Arctic; (2) further contribute to the activities of the Arctic Council (AC: An intergovernmental forum led by Arctic states); and (3) expand bilateral and multilateral cooperation with the Arctic and other countries.

As a part of these efforts, Japan was formally admitted as an observer in AC in May 2013. Since then, Japan has been contributing to activities of the AC through actively participating in discussions by dispatching government officials and experts to related meetings such as the Senior Arctic Official (SAO) meeting, working groups and task forces. Toward further contribution to the AC, Japan will strive to actively participate in discussions on expanding the role of observers, as well as engage in policy dialogues with the AC chair, member states and others.

With a view to demonstrating Japan's efforts on the Arctic, Ambassador in charge of Arctic Affairs, Kazuko Shiraishi actively participated in various international forums on the Arctic held in such countries as Russia, the U.S., and Iceland, and exchanged views on the Arctic with countries concerned including the Arctic states.

In April, the Trilateral High-Level Dialogue on the Arctic among Japan, China and the ROK was held for the first time with the participants of government officials from the three countries as well as experts from relevant research institutions. In this dialogue, the three countries exchanged views on such topics as the possibility of future trilateral cooperation on the Arctic.

In November, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs invited the Ambassador for Arctic Affairs of Finland, which was appointed as the chair country of the AC for two years from 2017, to Japan. Taking this opportunity, he visited Japanese research facilities on the Arctic and exchanged views with a diverse group of people from industries, government and academia including Parliamentary Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Takei and the Parliamentary League of Arctic Frontier Study. This invitational program promoted his understanding of Japan's initiatives and strengths on Arctic issues, and showed Finland, the next AC chair, Japan's ability to make further contribution to the activities of the AC.